VTA TRANSIT ANALYTICS DASHBOARD - COMPLETE BEGINNER'S SETUP GUIDE

Welcome! This guide will help you set up a dashboard (a visual website) that 
predicts bus and train delays in the San Jose, California area.

Don't worry if you've never coded before - we'll explain everything step by step!



WHAT IS THIS PROJECT?

This project:
• Collects real-time information about VTA buses and trains (where they are)
• Collects weather information (temperature, rain, etc.)
• Uses that data to predict how delayed buses and trains will be
• Shows everything on a beautiful interactive website

Think of it like a weather forecast, but for bus delays!



WHAT YOU'LL NEED

1. A computer with internet
2. About 30 minutes for initial setup
3. Patience to collect data over a few hours or days (the computer does this, 
   not you - you just need to run it multiple times)



IMPORTANT TERMS EXPLAINED

• Python: A programming language (like English, but for computers)
• API: A way to ask another website for data
• API Key: Like a password that lets you access data from websites
• Terminal/Command Line: A black window where you type commands to tell the 
  computer what to do
• Script: A file with instructions for the computer to follow
• Dashboard: A website that displays information visually



BEFORE YOU START

You'll need to get two "API Keys" (think of them as permission slips to access 
data from the internet). These are free!

1. VTA API KEY (Required)
   This lets you download bus and train location data.
   
   How to get it:
   a) Go to: https://511.org/open-data/token
   b) Click "Create Account" or "Sign Up"
   c) Fill in your email and create a password
   d) Check your email and click the confirmation link
   e) Log in to 511.org
   f) Find the section that says "API Token" or "API Key"
   g) Copy the long string of letters and numbers - this is your key!
   h) Save it in a safe place (like a text file on your desktop)

2. OPENWEATHER API KEY (Optional but recommended)
   This lets you download weather data.
   
   How to get it:
   a) Go to: https://openweathermap.org/api
   b) Click "Sign Up" in the top right
   c) Fill in your information and create an account
   d) Check your email and confirm your account
   e) Log in, then go to "API keys" section
   f) You'll see a key already created - copy it!
   g) Save it in a safe place



STEP 1: INSTALL PYTHON

Python is the language this project is written in. Your computer needs it 
installed to run the project.

FOR WINDOWS:
1. Go to: https://www.python.org/downloads/
2. Click the big yellow "Download Python" button
3. Once downloaded, double-click the installer file
4. IMPORTANT: Check the box that says "Add Python to PATH" at the bottom!
5. Click "Install Now"
6. Wait for it to finish, then click "Close"

FOR MAC:
1. Go to: https://www.python.org/downloads/
2. Click the big yellow "Download Python" button
3. Once downloaded, double-click the installer file
4. Follow the installation wizard (click Continue, Agree, Install)
5. Enter your password if asked
6. Click "Close" when done

To check if it worked:
• Windows: Open "Command Prompt" (search for it in the Start menu)
• Mac: Open "Terminal" (search for it in Spotlight)
• Type: python --version
• Press Enter
• You should see something like "Python 3.11.x" - that means it worked!



STEP 2: DOWNLOAD THIS PROJECT

If you're reading this, you probably already have the project files! 

If not, go to the GitHub page and click the green "Code" button, then 
"Download ZIP". Extract (unzip) the folder to your Desktop.



STEP 3: INSTALL REQUIRED PACKAGES

Python needs some extra tools (called "packages") to run this project.

1. Open Terminal (Mac) or Command Prompt (Windows)

2. Navigate to the project folder:
   Type: cd Desktop/VTA-Transit-Analytics-and-Delay-Prediction
   (Adjust this path if you put the folder somewhere else)
   Press Enter

3. Install the packages:
   Type: pip install -r requirements.txt
   Press Enter
   
4. Wait a few minutes - you'll see lots of text scrolling. That's normal!
   When it says "Successfully installed..." you're done!



STEP 4: ADD YOUR API KEYS

Now we need to tell the project about your API keys (the permission slips you 
got earlier).

1. In the project folder, create a new file called ".env"
   
   How to create .env file:
   • Windows: Right-click in the folder → New → Text Document
     Rename it from "New Text Document.txt" to ".env"
     (You might need to enable "File name extensions" in File Explorer)
   
   • Mac: Open TextEdit → New Document → Format menu → Make Plain Text
     Save it as ".env" in the project folder

2. Open the .env file with a text editor (Notepad on Windows, TextEdit on Mac)

3. Type these two lines EXACTLY, replacing the text after = with YOUR keys:
   
   VTA_API_KEY=paste_your_511_org_key_here
   OPENWEATHER_API_KEY=paste_your_openweather_key_here

   Example:
   VTA_API_KEY=abc123xyz789
   OPENWEATHER_API_KEY=def456uvw012

4. Save the file and close it



STEP 5: COLLECT BUS AND TRAIN DATA

Now the fun part! We're going to collect real data about buses and trains.

1. Make sure Terminal/Command Prompt is still open in your project folder
   (If you closed it, go back to Step 3 and do step 2 again)

2. Type this command:
   python src/collect_vta_data.py
   
3. Press Enter

4. You should see messages like "Collecting data..." and "Data saved!"
   If you see an error about API keys, go back and check Step 4

5. IMPORTANT: This only collects data for RIGHT NOW (one snapshot in time).
   To build a good prediction model, you need lots of snapshots!
   
   How to collect more data:
   • Run the same command again every 10-15 minutes
   • Do this several times throughout the day
   • The more data you collect, the better your predictions will be
   • Aim to collect at least 50-100 snapshots (over several days is best)



STEP 6: COLLECT WEATHER DATA (OPTIONAL)

Weather affects delays! This step is optional but makes predictions better.

1. In Terminal/Command Prompt, type:
   python src/collect_weather_data.py

2. Press Enter

3. This also just captures one moment in time, so run it multiple times
   (ideally at the same time you run the bus/train data collection)



STEP 7: PROCESS THE DATA

Now we need to "clean" the data (remove errors, combine everything together).

1. In Terminal/Command Prompt, type:
   python src/clean_merge_data.py

2. Press Enter

3. You'll see messages about cleaning and merging data

4. When it says "Processing complete!" you're done!



STEP 8: TRAIN THE PREDICTION MODEL

This is where the magic happens! The computer will learn patterns from your 
data to predict delays.

1. In Terminal/Command Prompt, type:
   python src/train_model.py

2. Press Enter

3. You'll see numbers and statistics - these tell you how accurate the 
   predictions are

4. When it finishes, the computer has "learned" how to predict delays!



STEP 9: VIEW YOUR DASHBOARD!

Finally, let's see everything on a beautiful website!

1. In Terminal/Command Prompt, type:
   streamlit run dashboard/app.py

2. Press Enter

3. Your web browser should automatically open showing your dashboard!
   If it doesn't, look in Terminal/Command Prompt for a message like:
   "Local URL: http://localhost:8501"
   Copy that URL and paste it in your web browser

4. Explore the dashboard:
   • Overview: Learn about the project
   • Model Performance: See how accurate your predictions are
   • Data Preview: Browse the data you collected

5. To stop the dashboard: Go back to Terminal/Command Prompt and press 
   Ctrl+C (both Windows and Mac)



HELP! SOMETHING WENT WRONG

Problem: "Python is not recognized" or "command not found"
Solution: Python isn't installed correctly. Go back to Step 1 and make sure 
         you checked "Add Python to PATH" during installation

Problem: "No module named 'streamlit'" or similar
Solution: The packages didn't install. Go back to Step 3

Problem: Dashboard shows "No model files found"
Solution: You haven't trained the model yet. Do Step 8

Problem: "API authentication failed"
Solution: Your API keys aren't working. Check that you:
         • Copied them correctly (no extra spaces)
         • Put them in the .env file correctly
         • The keys are activated (sometimes OpenWeather takes an hour to activate)

Problem: "Not enough data for training"
Solution: You need to collect more data. Go back to Step 5 and run it more 
         times. You need at least 50-100 data points



TIPS FOR SUCCESS

1. Be patient with data collection
   • Collect data at different times of day (morning rush, lunch, evening)
   • Collect on different days of the week (weekdays vs weekends)
   • More data = better predictions

2. Run collection automatically (Advanced)
   • On Windows: Use Task Scheduler
   • On Mac: Use cron jobs or Automator
   • Google "schedule Python script [your operating system]" for tutorials

3. Update your data regularly
   • Once you have initial predictions, keep collecting more data
   • Re-run Step 7 (process data) and Step 8 (train model) with new data
   • Your predictions will get better over time!


WHAT'S IN EACH FOLDER?

dashboard/        → The visual website files
src/              → The Python scripts you run
data/raw/         → Where raw data from APIs gets saved
data/processed/   → Where cleaned data gets saved
models/           → Where the trained prediction model gets saved
notebooks/        → Advanced: Jupyter notebooks for data analysis
